# Occupancy Detection Through Light, Humidity, Carbon Dioxide and Temperature Measurements

Accurate determination of office occupancy is an important problem, the solution to which could enable many compelling applications. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) as well as lighting are two major energy consumers in buildings. Previous studies showed that implementing demand driven lighting and HVAC operations could substantially reduce building energy consumption. However, such solutions rely on accurate occupancy information. This study evaluates the accuracy of the prediction of occupancy in an office room using data from temperature, light, humidity and carbon dioxide sensor measurements with different statistical classification methods using the open source Python Scikit-Learn library. In the literature, these statistical methods are also referred to as machine learning-based multi-sensors data fusion methods [11]. All models have been tested on three datasets (one training and two testing datasets), and their performance has been evaluated using the conflict matrix. Typically the best accuracies are obtained from training k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), Decision Trees (DT) and Random Forrest (RF) models. When all of the features are taken into consideration, the average testing accuracy of 99.4% is achieved by the random forest model. Light has proved to be the best single occupancy predictor. When only carbon dioxide level, humidity, week status (WS) and number of seconds from midnight (SM) are taken into consideration, the random forest model achieves the average testing accuracy of 99.04%. Also, it was shown that using the features extracted from the time stamp, SM and WS, significantly improves prediction accuracy when decision trees or random forest models are used.

The dataset used in this study is the “Occupancy detection data set” from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The original study, during which the dataset was generated, is [1]. The dataset can be accessed through the following link: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Occupancy+Detection+